README.md, before:

 
# SQLiteHistograms

This SQLite extension library is based on the 'ext/misc/series.c example from the SQLite source files. 
It uses the virtual table feature of SQLite to generate tables on the fly.

The library contains three extensions: HISTO for calculating histograms of data, RATIOHISTO for calculating 
ratios of two histograms and MEANHISTO for calculating interpolated values of 2D scatter data.

## HISTO function: 

The signature of the HISTO function is as follows:  
  `HISTO("tablename", "columnname", nbins, minbin, maxbin)`   
The tablename and the columnname must be entered with quotes or double quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively.
An example is an SQLite table, "AllProteins", that contains a column of integers labelled "NumberofResiduesInModel". Rows in the table are labelled with this
number which goes up to about 1500. A histogram can be computed using the HISTO function like this:   
  `SELECT * FROM HISTO("AllProteins", "NumberofResiduesInModel", 15, 0, 1500);`  
This produces a histogram with 15 bins between 0 and 1500. In the SQLitebrowser the result can be visualised graphically as below:  
![alt text](histo.jpg)

## RATIOHISTO function: 

The signature of the RATIOHISTO function is as follows:  
  `RATIOHISTO("tablename", "columnname", nbins, minbin, maxbin,  "discrcolid", discrval);`  
The tablename and the columnname must be entered with quotes or double quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively. The "discrcolid" is the name of a
column with values that may be a function of the columnname values.  
Given two columns where the values in one column is a function of the values in the other RATIOHISTO creates two 
histograms, count1 and count2. The bin count in count1 are those "columnname" values where the corresponding "discrcolid" 
is smaller than discrval. The bin count in count2 are those "columnname" values where the corresponding "discrcolid" is 
greater than discrval. RATIOHISTO then computes a column named ratio given as count2/(count1+count2) for each bin.  

An example is an SQLite table, "AllProteins", containing a column labelled "LLGvrms". It also has a column, "CCglobal", 
which is correlated to the values in "LLGvrms" in the sense that whenever values of CCglobal are below 0.2 the 
corresponding LLGvrms value is 
below 50. Two different histograms, "count1" and "count2", can be produced when issuing the statement:  
   `SELECT * FROM RATIOHISTO("AllProteins", "LLGvrms", 20, 0, 90, "CCglobal", 0.2);`  
as illustrated below:  
![alt text](ratio1.jpg)

Although the two histograms peak at different bin values this can be better illustrated by computing the ratio of the "count2" 
histogram divided by the total count. These values are stored in the "ratio" column which for this particular table 
happens to be a sigmoidal curve as illustrated below:  
![alt text](ratio2.jpg)

## MEANHISTO function  

The signature for the MEANHISTO function is as follows:  
  `MEANHISTO('tablename', 'xcolumnname', 'ycolumnname', nbins, minbin, maxbin);`  
The "tablename", the "xcolumnname" and the "ycolumnname" must be entered in quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively. This function takes a 2 dimensional table
and sorts the data into nbins number of bins with respect to the xcolumnname values. For each bin it then computes the average of
the corresponding ycolumnname values. Thus creating an interpolated curve through the 2 dimensional scatter data. 
In addition it also computes the standard deviation, sigma, and the standard error margin, sem, and the total count of each bin.  

To demonstrate the use of MEANHISTO consider
an SQLite table, "AllProteins", containing two columns labelled "FracvarVRMS1" and "LLGrefl_vrms" 
respectively. The LLGrefl_vrms values are a function of the FracvarVRMS1 values albeit not an exact function.
So the following plain SQLite statement:  
  `SELECT FracvarVRMS1, LLGrefl_vrms FROM AllProteins WHERE FracvarVRMS1 <= 0.6;`  
 produces the table and the scatter plot below  
![alt text](scatter.jpg)

An interpolated curve through this scatter plot can be created with the following statement:  
  `SELECT * FROM MEANHISTO("AllProteins", "FracvarVRMS1", "LLGrefl_vrms", 30, 0, 0.6);`  
which produces the table of average bin values below:  
![alt text](mean.jpg)



## Compile on Windows with Visual Studio 2015

cl /Fohelpers.obj /c helpers.cpp /EHsc ^  
 && cl /Foratiohistogram.obj /c ratiohistogram.cpp /EHsc ^  
 && cl /Fohistogram.obj /c histogram.cpp /EHsc ^  
 && cl /Fomeanhistogram.obj /c meanhistogram.cpp /EHsc ^  
 && cl /FoRegistExt.obj /c RegistExt.cpp /EHsc ^  
 && link /DLL /OUT:histograms.dll helpers.obj RegistExt.obj meanhistogram.obj histogram.obj ratiohistogram.obj


## Compile on Linux with g++

 g++ -fPIC -lm -shared histogram.cpp helpers.cpp meanhistogram.cpp ratiohistogram.cpp RegistExt.cpp -o histograms.so


## Loading the extension from the sqlite3 commandline

### on Windows:
 
 sqlite> .load histograms.dll
 
### on Linux:
 
 sqlite> .load ./histograms.so

## Bugs and feedback
Feel free to get in touch with me.

Commit message:

get rid of covariance function. update README.md

README.md, after:

 
# SQLiteHistograms

This SQLite extension library is based on the 'ext/misc/series.c example from the SQLite source files. 
It uses the virtual table feature of SQLite to generate tables on the fly.

The library contains more SQLite extensions: HISTO for calculating histograms of data, RATIOHISTO
for calculating 
ratios of two histograms and MEANHISTO for calculating interpolated values of 2D scatter data.
SQRT, LOG, EXP and POW are provided for calculating squareroot, logarithm, exponential and raising 
column values to a power, respectively. The Pearson correlation value and the Spearman rank 
correlation can be calculated between two columns with the CORREL and the SPEARMANCORREL functions.

## HISTO function: 

The signature of the HISTO function is as follows:  
  `HISTO("tablename", "columnname", nbins, minbin, maxbin)`   
The tablename and the columnname must be entered with quotes or double quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively.
An example is an SQLite table, "AllProteins", that contains a column of integers labelled "NumberofResiduesInModel". Rows in the table are labelled with this
number which goes up to about 1500. A histogram can be computed using the HISTO function like this:   
  `SELECT * FROM HISTO("AllProteins", "NumberofResiduesInModel", 15, 0, 1500);`  
This produces a histogram with 15 bins between 0 and 1500. In the SQLitebrowser the result can be visualised graphically as below:  
![alt text](histo.jpg)

## RATIOHISTO function: 

The signature of the RATIOHISTO function is as follows:  
  `RATIOHISTO("tablename", "columnname", nbins, minbin, maxbin,  "discrcolid", discrval);`  
The tablename and the columnname must be entered with quotes or double quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively. The "discrcolid" is the name of a
column with values that may be a function of the columnname values.  
Given two columns where the values in one column is a function of the values in the other RATIOHISTO creates two 
histograms, count1 and count2. The bin count in count1 are those "columnname" values where the corresponding "discrcolid" 
is smaller than discrval. The bin count in count2 are those "columnname" values where the corresponding "discrcolid" is 
greater than discrval. RATIOHISTO then computes a column named ratio given as count2/(count1+count2) for each bin.  

An example is an SQLite table, "AllProteins", containing a column labelled "LLGvrms". It also has a column, "CCglobal", 
which is correlated to the values in "LLGvrms" in the sense that whenever values of CCglobal are below 0.2 the 
corresponding LLGvrms value is 
below 50. Two different histograms, "count1" and "count2", can be produced when issuing the statement:  
   `SELECT * FROM RATIOHISTO("AllProteins", "LLGvrms", 20, 0, 90, "CCglobal", 0.2);`  
as illustrated below:  
![alt text](ratio1.jpg)

Although the two histograms peak at different bin values this can be better illustrated by computing the ratio of the "count2" 
histogram divided by the total count. These values are stored in the "ratio" column which for this particular table 
happens to be a sigmoidal curve as illustrated below:  
![alt text](ratio2.jpg)

## MEANHISTO function  

The signature for the MEANHISTO function is as follows:  
  `MEANHISTO('tablename', 'xcolumnname', 'ycolumnname', nbins, minbin, maxbin);`  
The "tablename", the "xcolumnname" and the "ycolumnname" must be entered in quotes. The arguments, nbins, minbin and maxbin are the
number of histogram bins, the minimum bin value and the maximum bin value respectively. This function takes a 2 dimensional table
and sorts the data into nbins number of bins with respect to the xcolumnname values. For each bin it then computes the average of
the corresponding ycolumnname values. Thus creating an interpolated curve through the 2 dimensional scatter data. 
In addition it also computes the standard deviation, sigma, and the standard error margin, sem, and the total count of each bin.  

To demonstrate the use of MEANHISTO consider
an SQLite table, "AllProteins", containing two columns labelled "FracvarVRMS1" and "LLGrefl_vrms" 
respectively. The LLGrefl_vrms values are a function of the FracvarVRMS1 values albeit not an exact function.
So the following plain SQLite statement:  
  `SELECT FracvarVRMS1, LLGrefl_vrms FROM AllProteins WHERE FracvarVRMS1 <= 0.6;`  
 produces the table and the scatter plot below  
![alt text](scatter.jpg)

An interpolated curve through this scatter plot can be created with the following statement:  
  `SELECT * FROM MEANHISTO("AllProteins", "FracvarVRMS1", "LLGrefl_vrms", 30, 0, 0.6);`  
which produces the table of average bin values below:  
![alt text](mean.jpg)


## SQRT, LOG, EXP and POW functions

The squareroot, logarithm, exponential and the power function act on column values and are 
invoked as in
   `SELECT SQRT(9), LOG(10), EXP(3), POW(4,2);`
   
## Correlation values
   
The Pearson correlation value and the Spearman rank correlation value can be calculated as in:
    `SELECT CORREL(LLGvrms, CCglobal) FROM AllProteins;`
or
    `SELECT SPEARMANCORREL(LLGvrms, CCglobal) FROM AllProteins;`

## Compile on Windows with Visual Studio 2015

cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /Fohelpers.obj /c helpers.cpp  ^
 && cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /FoSQLiteExt.obj /c SQLiteExt.cpp ^
 && cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /Foratiohistogram.obj /c ratiohistogram.cpp ^
 && cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /Fohistogram.obj /c histogram.cpp ^
 && cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /Fomeanhistogram.obj /c meanhistogram.cpp ^
 && cl /Ox /EHsc /GL /FoRegistExt.obj /c RegistExt.cpp ^
 && link /DLL /LTCG /OUT:histograms.dll helpers.obj SQLiteExt.obj RegistExt.obj meanhistogram.obj histogram.obj ratiohistogram.obj

 
## Compile on Linux with g++

 g++ -fPIC -lm -shared histogram.cpp helpers.cpp meanhistogram.cpp ratiohistogram.cpp SQLiteExt.cpp RegistExt.cpp -o histograms.so


## Loading the extension from the sqlite3 commandline

### on Windows:
 
 sqlite> .load histograms.dll
 
### on Linux:
 
 sqlite> .load ./histograms.so

## Bugs and feedback
Feel free to get in touch with me.
